---
title: Hume's problem of Induction
author: your name
pubDatetime: 2025-10-24T05:17:19Z
slug: hume-problem-of-induction
featured: true
draft: false
tags:
  - Philosophy of Science

description: Any object (like a bread) can have special powers (a bread's special power is that it can nourish us). But does that mean that another object that looks the same as our original object (another bread) has that special power as well?
canonicalURL: https://example.org/my-article-was-already-posted-here
---


Hume segregates all human reasoning into relations of ideas and matters of fact where relations of ideas refer to reasoning that is intuitively or demonstratively certain. We can categorise much of mathematics into relations of ideas, where we can prove conjectures deductively, whereas matters of fact cannot be ascertained similarly (p.18). For example, sunlight during sunset is yellowish or when a billiard ball hits another one, it also moves. Hume argues all attempts at demonstrative reasoning for such facts fail. However, one might argue that light from the sun is completely white and that while entering the atmosphere, most of the shorter wavelength of light (using the wave theory of light, in this case it's blue, violet) gets scattered away, leaving the yellowish light. Here, Hume would argue that the reasoning itself is another matter of fact (p.19). Although science helps us reason a bit longer why one matter of fact might be true, it does not give us an ultimate reason for such a fact. In Hume’s words, “The perfect philosophy just staves off our ignorance a little longer” (p.22).

Hume then presents his arguments about the secret powers of objects, which are‌ matters of fact. He says that the observable qualities about that object give no hint of the secret power it possesses. For example, the secret power of bread is to provide nourishment, but this is not at all certain from the bread’s appearance (p.27). However, if one discovers that a bread nourishes, they would easily assume that another bread that looks similar would still nourish them, this is the problem of induction. We extend this to include the fact that we base our present experiences from our past ones. For example, we know that when a billiard ball hits another one, it would also move. Hume questions the reason we know this. He says that there isn’t any way valid we can reason this (p.23). From past experiences, we have noticed that whenever a ball hits another one, it moves, and we automatically generalise this to the future, that is if a ball hits another, it will move. Hume argues that this generalisation cannot be shown demonstratively by a valid argument and it is only habit that makes this generalisation trivial (p.32). Hume considers the scenario where uniformity of nature doesn’t exist and objects do not show the same powers throughout time and then our bold generalisation of the future would be wrong. Since we can conceive negation of the uniformity principle (i.e. Objects will have the same powers throughout time), this implies that the reasoning behind it is definitely not demonstrative (A conclusion of a demonstrative argument has to be a necessary truth for example, all bachelors are unmarried). He further strengthens his argument by stating that every probable argument for the uniformity principle presupposes the uniformity of nature (this is a circular argument). Hence, a probable argument for the same won’t be a valid one.

Hume argues that similar observable qualities have similar powers, but since there is no correlation between observable qualities and secret powers, there is no logical argument for the above statement. However, what if there was a correlation between some qualities of an object and their secret powers? Consider an object z, if we can point at some fundamental property of z, say x, that shows a power, say y, and if z is defined to exhibit x, then it will automatically be clear that all z would show the power y. 

The problem then becomes to find such a fundamental property x that demonstratively implies the existence of a power y. Finding such a property would require a great amount of advancement in science and logic and maybe even their unification. I think that if we ever want to solve the problem of induction, completely, it should come down to finding this property that makes the power associated with an object demonstratively clear.

Although this does not clearly tell us if z would continue to show this property throughout time. However, we can answer that question if we can find another characteristic of the property we are seeking for: Time variability for the existence of that property in the object.

For the time being, however, I believe the Bayesian argument defends inductive reasoning strongly. Using probability theory, we can predict some future events based on how several past events turned out. Bayes’ rule helps us calculate an updated probability (usually in light of new evidence) of a hypothesis given a prior probability for the same. But what would be the prior probability in this case? Laplace, here, proposed the principle of indifference where if you don’t have reason to favour one hypothesis over another, then one should assign them equal probabilities. Given the principle of indifference, Bayes’ rule and some other aspects of probability calculus, we can successfully predict some future events, considering some past events. For example, consider the case of drawing white balls out of an urn containing white and black balls. Here, we can successfully predict the likelihood of drawing a white ball, given the prior number of times we drew white balls. Using this model, if 90 out of 100 balls that we drew were white (so in total we drew 100 balls and out of those 90 were white), then the model predicts that the 91st ball would also be white with a 0.89 probability.
Hence, given that previous instances of our assumption that the uniformity principle holds makes it much more likely that our next assumption would also be true.

In conclusion, I believe that solving Hume’s problem is one of the most hard tasks for human reasoning. However, in this essay, I try to pinpoint what is essential to satisfy if we ever solve this problem. I also establish and reformulate one of the best arguments for the solution that we can come up with for the time being.

