---
author: Shubkarman Walia
pubDatetime: 2025-10-24T15:22:00Z
modDatetime: 2025-06-13T16:52:45.934Z
title: Rethinking the Theory-Reality Bridge
slug: rethinking-the-theory-reality-bridge
featured: true
draft: false
tags:
  - Philosophy of Science
description:
  What is the difference between scientific theories and the real phenomena that it tries to model? How should we think about their relationship?
---
Science education convinces us that theories help us understand reality better, that we can by writing scribbles on pieces of paper discover the secrets that lie far away in stars. But the relationship between them has never been clearly designated. In this paper, I argue that reality is way more complex than it may seem in a high school textbook. My main thesis is that we can successfully justify Giere’s claim that theoretical laws like F = ma are not empirical using Operational analysis. I begin by elaborating on operationalism and then on Giere’s main claim and his view that these laws are linked to reality by means of models (paras 1 and 2). I then start the argument by questioning Giere further and answering those questions (using operational analysis) while also moving forward with my claim (paras 3 and 4) . I, then, contemplate potential objections to my argument and try to address them to the best of my ability (para 5). At then end I clarify how one should interpret this result and my stand with scientific realism (para 6)
 	 	
Percy Williams Bridgman, originally a physicist, had his work involved in creating very high pressures and observing novel behaviour of objects at such high pressures. His efforts to create pressures 100 times higher than previously ever created made him realise something much deeper about reasoning in physics and science. He reached a point where there was no way for him to even measure the experimental pressure created by him since all previously known pressure gauges broke down. To account for his personal experiences and the upcoming revolution in physics brought upon by Einstein’s theory of relativity, Bridgman created operationalism. He says that every different operation (or method of measurement) gives us a new concept about that physical quantity. For example, suppose we need to measure the distance a car has traversed with respect to a point, say this is our target length. There are different ways of measuring this length. One way might be to use a metre stick and to count how many times that stick fits in our target length. Another way might be to perpendicularly move a certain distance away (this distance we know) from the target point and then measure the angle subtended at our new position. Now we can use trigonometry to find what our target distance is. As you can see, it is not necessary that these two distances might be of the same length. The first method assumes that we can properly align the metre stick with the target length and that we ourselves are sure of the length of the metre stick. Whereas for the second method,we assume we measured the angle to a good accuracy and that trigonometry is a logically precise theory to give us the correct answer. However, one might argue that both these methods are a way of measuring the same absolute length but Bridgman proposes the lengths measured through these two methods are fundamentally different and we shouldn’t expect them to be the same. Operational way of thinking becomes way more useful when we are dealing with novel phenomena, when we aren’t certain about the nature of the system that we are trying to understand. For instance, imagine two light lamps and Jake is right in between them and he is at rest whereas Percy is moving close to light speed. If the two lamps are lit at the same time with respect to Jake, that is, they are turned on simultaneously with respect to Jake. A naive guess might be that since the lamps are turned on at the same time it should be the same for Percy as well. But using the fact that the speed of light is constant for all inertial observers, we can say that for Percy the turning on of lamps is not at all simultaneous. Thinking of this operationally, what we are doing here is measuring two different times for when the lamps are turned on, first for Jake and another for Percy (Imagine a clock held by Percy and another one by Jake). From a normal standpoint it would come as a great shock this event wasn’t simultaneous for Percy as well, but from an operational standpoint, it becomes clearer that simultaneity could be relative. I think it is highly useful to adopt Bridgman’s Operational thinking where one is considering edge/extreme cases, areas that have largely been unexplored. Rethinking everything we already know might complicate one's understanding. A simple example where one might be baffled by operationalism is where we know measuring the same thing twice would approximately give us the same answer. But in edge cases where we are measuring lengths at such a large scale that we are unsure whether Euclidean geometry even applies operationalism becomes highly elucidating
Coming to Giere, through his papers on models and representation in science, he states theoretical laws aren’t actually empirical, that is derived from experience/experiment. In fact, he says that these laws are directly related to models and these models‌,in turn, are similar to the real world. Let’s explain this with the theory of harmonic oscillators. This theory, according to Giere, comprises groups of models of different harmonic oscillators (which are just force functions that satisfy the differential equation nicely as we’ll see later) and the laws that connect these models to the real world. These models, although inspired by the real Oscillators (which comprise a box attached to a spring) are not meant to represent them exactly. One model might be that of a simple harmonic oscillator whose force just depends on its distance from its equilibrium position (F = -kx), another model could be that of a damped harmonic oscillator whose force depends on distance and its velocity (F = -kx-cv). In fact, the purpose of these models is to just represent a specific force function which satisfies the underlying laws neatly, that is F = ma in this case. To set these models apart from real-world examples, a physics textbook makes idealizations like, “the object experiences no friction”, or “the spring is massless”. Since there does not actually exist an oscillator which experiences zero friction, or a spring which is massless, Giere asserts that there is no way that we can come up with these laws by observation.
Now that I have cleared up different authors’ points of view in context with my thesis. I begin my argument by questioning Giere further: why did he have to create this whole abstract entity of models and say that these models mediate the correlation between theoretical laws and real systems? Why couldn’t he just say that these laws are directly correlated with the real systems? I think the reason is that it is very hard to take into account everything that’s affecting the real system. And, this becomes much more clear once we think about this operationally.
Let’s go back to our example of oscillators and try to apply F = ma at a real harmonic oscillator. With newton’s F = ma we can only predict, with certain accuracy, the system’s acceleration, velocity, and displacement (let’s call them target quantities) and the cause of change in these quantities is a force because of the spring pulling on the block, or a friction of the block with the ground (which affects its velocity) these are the only characteristics that we are certain about that affects the system’s motion. However, thinking about this operationally, there are a myriad of uncertainties. First, there could be a lot of other factors that we are uncertain about (beyond the scope of current physics), affecting the behaviour of the system’s measurable quantities. These other factors may or may not change the exact applicability of laws for this system. Like pressure in the room, air resistance, or maybe even something mysterious affecting the object’s speed. Can we think of a force function that considers all of these factors affecting the motion of our real oscillator? Second, there are different ways of measuring (operations) different quantities for this system and each different operation leads to a different interpretation, however the laws themselves rely on the fact that there exists an absolute version of each quantity, that is absolute length, time or more at least in the specified reference frame. Even if we can successfully measure one physical quantity, this act of measuring could affect the measurement of other quantities as well. Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle is a great example of this. Where measuring position of a subatomic particle with a greater accuracy makes measurement of its speed less accurate and vice versa.Coming back to our example, it becomes increasingly simple when we forget about the real oscillator and construct a model whose purpose is to give us a certain force function that we can actually work with.
	 	 	 	
Now one might argue that using these laws we still can predict a lot about physical systems and leveraging this predictive power we have built our 21st century technology. For example, when a ball falls from a height, it does seem to speed up by the magnitude that is predicted by Newton's laws. Does it not mean that the ball follows in accordance with these laws? To this, I would say, although it may seem like the ball directly follows these laws and even when we experimentally take measurements, just considering gravity (ignoring air resistance), we get a theoretical answer very close to the experimental one but‌ given the current status of physics we just can’t take into account all the factors that might affect the ball’s motion. Through schooling, we are nudged into believing this way; however given all the uncertainties that arise while thinking about this operationally, it is apparent that these laws don’t directly relate to reality. To explain my position, let’s consider another example of Mercury’s precision. Newton’s theory predicts that all planets under the influence of the sun and other nearby planets possess an orbit that processes. Using this theory, we could predict with satisfactory accuracy the precession of almost all planets except mercury. The theory was off from the experimental value by almost 43 seconds per arc century (a unit to measure precession). Tumbling upon this discrepancy, many physicists argued for fixes such as assuming the effect of dust between the sun and mercury even though the evidence for the same was miniscule (known to be non-existent now). Eventually, General relativity came to the rescue and predicted the extra 43 seconds per arc century without any adjustments. Now, we are in a tough position if we want to directly correlate planetary orbits with a theory. A naive answer might be that General relativity is definitely the better candidate. However, this solves the issue temporarily. What if a better theory comes along predicting the experimental values to a greater extent? That is why thinking of physical theories as the culmination of models is highly useful. Here we can easily say that Einstein’s theory is more similar to real systems than Newton’s.
While it might be unsettling for a student to realise the messy nature of reality, it should be clarified that a physicist should not look down upon this essay; rather, they should appreciate it. I’m not saying that theoretical statements don’t apply, apply to a lesser extent to real systems, or that this affects the predictive power of physics; rather that this is a good way to think about the relationship between theory and reality. Having said that, I think that Giere should agree with me when I say that science should strive to explain reality, a model that is not similar to real objects shouldn’t be deemed to be a good one. 	 	
In conclusion, Bridgman’s operational mindset exposes challenges of directly applying theoretical laws to messy real-world scenarios. Hence, to strike a middle ground I use Giere’s model-based framework to clarify the connection between reality and theories. However, the core goal of science - explaining reality - remains paramount.

Bibliography

Bridgman, P. W. (1993). The logic of modern physics. Ayer.
Giere, R. N. (1990). Explaining science: A cognitive approach. University of Chicago Press.
Mercury’s Precession. Smoot Group Cosmology. (n.d.). https://aether.lbl.gov/www/classes/p10/gr/PrecessionperihelionMercury.html






